Essay - Linus Torvalds

Linus Torvalds, the creator of the Linux kernel and Git, is the world’s most famous open-source software developer. It is hard to believe that Torvalds began Linux as a personal project by himself alone when you consider that today most computer devices run some form of the Linux kernel, from your smartphone running Android or an embedded device in your fridge.
Torvalds was born on December 28, 1969, in Helsinki, Finland. He was named after Linus Pauling, the famous physical chemist and Nobel Prize winner. In 1988 Torvalds enrolled in the University of Helsinki, the premier institution of higher education in Finland. By that time he had already been programming for half of his life. He majored in computer science. And this is where he first learned to program in C, the language he would eventually use to write the Linux Kernel
In 1987 Torvalds used his savings to buy his first computer, a Sinclair QL. This was one of the world's first 32-bit computers for home use. He soon became unhappy with it because it could not be reprogrammed due to the operating system residing in ROM (read-only memory). In early 1991 he purchased an IBM-compatible personal computer. As intrigued as he was with this new computer he was disappointed with the MS-DOS OS that came with it as he was more comfortable with the UNIX system he used at the University of Helsinki. Torvalds attempted to obtain a version of UNIX but since the current market for UNIX involved was mainly corporations he could not find even a basic system for less than $5,000. He considered MINIX, a small clone of UNIX created by Andrew Tanenbaum in order to teach UNIX to university students. Unfortunately, most of Minix’s source code was not publicly available, it also lacked some of the import features of the full blown UNIX environment. MINIX also had a licensing fee.
Due to the above obstructions, Torvalds decided to create a new operating system that was based on both MINIX and UNIX. Because university in Finland is free there was little pressure to graduate within four years so Torvalds decided to devote his full attention to his project.On August 25, 1991, he announced his pet project on the MINIX newsgroup comp.os.minix as follows:
Message-ID: 1991Aug25.205708.9541@klaava.helsinki.fi
From: torvalds@klaava.helsinki.fi (Linus Benedict Torvalds)
To: Newsgroups: comp.os.minix
Subject: What would you like to see most in minix?
Summary: small poll for my new operating system
Hello everybody out there using minix-
I'm doing a (free) operating system (just a hobby, won't be big and professional like gnu) for 386 (486) AT clones. This has been brewing since april, and is starting to get ready. I'd like any feedback on things people like/dislike in minix, as my OS resembles it somewhat (same physical layout of the file-sytem due to practical reasons)among other things.
I've currently ported bash (1.08) an gcc (1.40), and things seem to work. This implies that i'll get something practical within a few months, and I'd like to know what features most people want.
Any suggestions are welcome, but I won't promise I'll implement them :-)
Linus Torvalds torvalds@kruuna.helsinki.fi
On the following month, September 17 he completed an alpha version (0.01). Shortly thereafter, on October 5, he announced version (0.02), the beta. It featured the ability to run both bash and the GNU C compiler GCC. This announcement launched the biggest collaborative project the world has ever known. It began:
Do you pine for the nice days of minix-1.1, when men were men and wrote their own device drivers? Are you without a nice project and just dying to cut your teeth on a OS you can try to modify for your needs? Are you finding it frustrating when everything works on minix? No more all-nighters to get a nifty program working? Then this post might be just for you :-)
As I mentioned a month(?) ago, I'm working on a free version of a minix-lookalike for AT-386 computers. It has finally reached the stage where it's even usable (though may not be depending on what you want), and I am willing to put out the sources for wider distribution. It is just version 0.02 (+1 (very small) patch already), but I've successfully run bash/gcc/gnu-make/gnu-sed/compress etc under it.
Sources for this pet project of mine can be found at nic.funet.fi (128.214.6.100) in the directory /pub/OS/Linux. The directory also contains some README-file and a couple of binaries to work under linux (bash, update and gcc, what more can you ask for :-). Full kernel source is provided, as no minix code has been used. Library sources are only partially free, so that cannot be distributed currently. The system is able to compile "as-is" and has been known to work. Heh. . . .
Torvalds best decision was to release Linux under the GPL (GNU General Public License)  developed by Richard Stallman, a notable programmer and a leading advocate of free software, In large part a consequence of this very liberal licensing, many programmers from around the world quickly became involved in the linux project helping develop the Linux OS. As a result, it became prolific and is used in many systems today.

